<ui:composition xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"
	xmlns:h="http://java.sun.com/jsf/html"
	xmlns:f="http://java.sun.com/jsf/core"
	xmlns:ui="http://java.sun.com/jsf/facelets"
	xmlns:p="http://primefaces.org/ui"
	xmlns:c="http://java.sun.com/jsp/jstl/core">


	<h1 align="center">Kitab ma ba‘d at-tabi‘at (Aristotle's
		Metaphysics)</h1>

	<p:accordionPanel>
		<p:tab title="Description">
			<p>
				<h:outputText
					value="Averroès, Tafsir ma ba‘d at-tabi‘at, Texte arabe inédit établi par Maurice Bouyges,
					 Imprimerie Catholique, Beyrouth 1938-1952 (Bibliotheca Arabica Scholasticorum, 
					 Série arabe V,1; V,2; VI; VII)." />
			</p>
		</p:tab>
		<p:tab title="Structure and composition">
			<h:outputText
				value="The first two books of the Metaphysics appear in reverse order with respect to the Greek.
				Alpha elatton ­– i. e. one of the two introductory books of the Metaphysics as it has come down 
				to us – antecedes Alpha Meizon, the well-known beginning of Aristotle’s work.[1] Two Arabic 
				translations of alpha elatton are extant: the Leiden MS contains the translation by Isḥāq ibn Ḥunayn 
				(d. 910 A. D.) in the main text, and another translation in the margins. The latter is ascribed 
				to a certain Usṭāṯ (9th century), who is mentioned also in the Kitāb al-Fihrist by Ibn al-Nadīm 
				(d. 995 A. D.) as the author of the Arabic translation of the Metaphysics made for al-Kindī. 
				Book Alpha Meizon is extant in Arabic only from 987 a 6 onwards. Averroes had at his disposal 
				the translation by a certain Naẓīf (10th century). The latter is mentioned by Ibn al-Nadīm as a 
				physician and a mathematician, but there is no mention of Naẓīf’s translation of the Metaphysics 
				in the Kitāb al-Fihrist. Passages from Alpha Meizon which are missing in Naẓīf’s translation feature – 
				quoted in all likelihood from a different translation – in the Metaphysics (Ilāhiyyāt) of Avicenna’s 
				Kitāb al- Šifā’, as well as in the Kitāb al-Milal wa-l-niḥal by al-Šahrastānī (d. 1153 A. D.), and 
				in the Kitāb fī ‘ilm mā ba‘d al-ṭabī‘a by ‘Abd al-Laṭīf al-Baġdādī (d. 1231 A. D.). 
				Finally, the MS Città del Vaticano, Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana, Ott. Lat. 2048 contains in an 
				anonymous Latin translation a part of Alpha Meizon not included in the so-called Metaphysica Nova, 
				i.e. the Arabo-Latin translation of the Metaphysics made on the basis of Averroes’Long Commentary. 
				Taking into account the fact that MS Ott. Lat. 2048 bears the hallmarks of a translation from Arabic, 
				one may surmise that even the parts of Alpha Meizon unknown to Averroes were extant in Arabic, 
				although the details of this textual transmission remain obscure. Book Βeta is extant in Usṭāṯ’s translation, 
				albeit fragmentarily. Another translation of this book is mentioned in the Kitāb al-Fihrist, 
				as well as the commentary by Syrianus on it.[2] Usṭāṯ’s translation of Book Beta is also recorded 
				among the books in the possession of Yaḥyā ibn ‘Adī.[3] Usṭāṯ’s translation seems to be in use for 
				Book Gamma, too, but Averroes also quotes a different translation, possibly Isḥāq’s one. 
				Books Delta and Epsilon are extant in Usṭāṯ’s translation. Usṭāṯ translated also Zeta, which is 
				quoted by Averroes in the lemmata; but the latter also quotes the epitome of Nicolaus Damascenus 
				in his commentary. As for Book Ηeta, Averroes had only Usṭāṯ’s translation at his disposal. 
				Books Theta and Iota are quoted in Usṭāṯ’s translation in the lemmata, but in the commentary 
				Averroes has recourse to a different translation, commonly ascribed to Isḥāq ibn Ḥunayn. Lambda, 
				the theological book of the Metaphysics par excellence, was translated six times, in itself an 
				indication of the extraordinary interest raised by Aristotle’s doctrine of the First Principle. 
				Averroes quotes Book Lambda in two translations in the lemmata of his commentary. From 1069 a 18 
				(the beginning of the book) to 1072 b 16 Averroes uses the translation from Syriac made by Abū Bišr 
				Mattā (d. 940 A. D.), one of the leaders of the “Aristotelians of Baghdad” mentioned above. According 
				to the Kitāb al-Fihrist, Abū Bišr Mattā translated also the commentary onLambda by Alexander of Aphrodisias, 
				and possibly also Themistius’ paraphrase. From 1072 b 16 onwards, Averroes comes back to the 
				translation ascribed to Usṭāṯ. Averroes’ commentary onLambda is of special importance because it quotes 
				Alexander’s commentary, lost in Greek. Besides, Averroes quotes the translation of Yaḥyā ibn ‘Adī and 
				another one, which can be ascribed either to Isḥāq ibn Ḥunayn or to a certain Šamlī (9th century), 
				an almost unknown translator to whom the Kitāb al-Fihrist also ascribes a translation of book Lambda. 
				Finally, an anonymous paraphrase of Lambda 6-10, edited in 1937 in Egypt and later on by Badawī (1947) 
				must be added. The terminological affinity of this paraphrase with the Arabic translation of Themistius’ 
				one should be considered in future studies. As for books Mu and Nu, neither the translations nor Averroes’ 
				commentaries are extant. However, Averroes seems to be acquainted with these books and provides a 
				description of them in his introduction to Lambda. According to a marginal note in f. 1 r of the Leiden MS, 
				book Mu was translated by ‘Īsā Ibn-Zur‘a (d. 1008 A. D.), and book Nu was translated by Naẓīf ibn Ayman. 
				Ibn al-Nadīm, in his Kitāb al-Fihrist, informs that the books of the Metaphysics are arranged according 
				to the order of the Greek letters, beginning from minor Alif (alpha elatton). To this, he adds that 
				the Metaphysics goes from minor Alif to Mim, and that the latter was translated by Yaḥyā ibn ‘Adī. 
				Then he says that books minor Alif - Mim had been also translated by Usṭāṯ for al-Kindī. Finally, 
				he states that Book Nun (i.e. Nu) was extant in Greek together with Alexander’s commentary.
				For the moment, the Graeco-Arabic pericopes include Books Alpha meizon (extant in Arabic only in part) 
				and Alpha elatton. Selecting &quot;order by Arabic&quot;, the user will find them in the reverse order, 
				as explained above. " />

			<h:outputLink id="paris1" target="_new"
				value="http://www.greekintoarabic.eu/index.php">
				<f:param name="id" value="12" />
				<f:param name="tx_ttnews%5Btt_news%5D" value="16" />
				<f:param name="cHash" value="24c0b6dab6099bcccf6cf26358a4d343" />
				<h:outputText
					value="(C. Martini Bonadeo, &quot;Averroes' Long Commentary on the Metaphysics is the first issue of 
					the Bibliotheca Arabica Scholasticorum Online&quot;)" />
			</h:outputLink>


			<p>Footnotes:</p>
			<ul style="list-style: none">
				<li>[1] This is the beginning of the Greek Metaphysics: Πάντες
					ἄνθρωποι τοῦ εἰδέναι ὀρέγονται φύσει (Metaph. A 1, 980 a 21),
					&quot;All men by nature desire to know&quot;, trans. W. D. Ross.
					This is the beginning of the Metaphysics in Arabic, as it has come
					down to us: إن النظر في الحق صعب من جهة سهل من جهة corresponding to
					Metaph. α 1, 992 b 30-31, ἡ περὶ τῆς ἀληθείας θεωρία τῇ μὲν χαλεπὴ
					τῇ δὲ ῥᾳδία, &quot;The investigation of the truth is in one way
					hard, in another easy&quot;, trans. W. D. Ross.</li>
				<li>[2] Extant in Greek, together with the commentary on Gamma
					and Mu-Nu. The critical edition of the Greek text is forthoming in
					the “Collection des Universités de France”, Association Guillaume
					Budé, Les Belles Lettres, Paris.</li>
				<li>[3] Yaḥyā ibn ‘Adī (d. 974 A. D.) was one of the leading
					scholars of so-called &quot;Aristotelians of Baghdad&quot;.</li>
			</ul>
		</p:tab>
		<p:tab title="Manuscripts">
			<ul>
				<li><h:outputLink id="leiden1" target="_new"
						value="descr/leiden1.xhtml">
						<h:outputText
							value="MS Leiden, Universiteitsbibliotheek, Or. 2074 (cod. arab. 1692)." />
					</h:outputLink></li>
			</ul>

		</p:tab>
		<p:tab title="Selected Bibliography">

			<p>Texts</p>
			<ul>
				<li>Averroès, Tafsir ma ba‘d at-tabi‘at, Texte arabe inédit,
					établi par Maurice Bouyges, Imprimerie Catholique, Beyrouth
					1938-1952 (Bibliotheca Arabica Scholasticorum).</li>

				<li>ʿA. Badawī, Arisṭū ‘inda l-‘arab. Dirāsāt wa-nuṣūṣ ġayr
					manšūra, Maktabat al-nahḍa al-miṣriyya, Cairo 1947 (Dirāsāt
					islāmiyya, 5).</li>

				<li>— Rasā’il falsafiyya li-l-Kindī wa-l-Fārābī wa-Ibn Bājja
					wa-Ibn 'Adī, al-Jāmi‘a al-Lībiyya, Bangazi 1973.</li>

				<li>M. J. de Goeje, Catalogus Codicum Orientalium Bibliothecae
					Academiae Lugduno-Batavae, vol. V, 324-325, n. 2821.</li>

				<li>C. Genequand, Ibn Rushd’s Metaphysics. A Translation with
					Introduction of Ibn Rushd’s Commentary on Aristotle’s Metaphysics,
					Book Lam, Brill, Leiden 1984.</li>

				<li>Ibn al-Nadīm, Kitāb al-fihrist, ed. G. Flügel, J. Rodiger,
					A. Muller, Vogel, Leipzig 1871-72; ed. R. Tağaddud, Marvi Offset
					Printing, Teheran 1973.</li>

				<li>S. Khalifat, Yaḥyā ibn ‘Adī, The Philosophical Treatises, A
					Critical Edition with an Introduction and Study, Publications of
					University of Jordan, Amman 1988.</li>

				<li>Mishkāt, M., Arisṭāṭālīs-i Ḥakīm. Naḫustīn maqāla-i Mā ba‘d
					al-ṭabī‘a mawsūm bi maqālat al-Alif al-ṣuġrā tarğama-i Isḥāq b.
					Ḥunayn bā Yaḥyā b. ‘Adī wa tafsīr-i Ibn-i Rushd, Tehran 1967.</li>
			</ul>

			<p>Further readings</p>
			<ul>
				<li>Abū l-‘Alā ‘Afīfī, "An Ancient Arabic Translation of the
					Book Lambda of Aristotle's Metaphysics" Bulletin of the Faculty of
					Arts of the University of Egypt 5 (1937), 89-138.</li>

				<li>L. Bauloye, "La traduction arabe de la Métaphysique et
					l’établissement du texte grec", in Aristotelica Secunda. Mélanges
					offerts à Christian Rutten, C.I.P.L., Liège 1996, 281-90.</li>

				<li>Averroès. Grand Commentaire de la Métaphysique d’Aristote,
					Z 1 et 2. Traduction et notes, Bulletin d'Etudes Orientales 49
					(1997), 53-73.</li>

				<li>Averroès. Grand Commentaire (Tafsîr) de la Métaphysique,
					livre Beta, Vrin, Paris 2002.</li>

				<li>A. Bertolacci, "On the Arabic Translations of Aristotle’s
					Metaphysics", Arabic Sciences and Philosophy 15 (2005), 241-75.</li>

				<li>The Reception of Aristotle’s Metaphysics in Avicenna’s
					Kitāb al-Šifā’. A Milestone of Western Metaphysical Thought, Brill,
					Leiden 2006 (Islamic philosophy, theology and science, 63).</li>

				<li>H. H. Biesterfeldt, "Kommunikation durch Übersetzung: Ziele
					und Methoden der griechisch-arabischen Übersetzungen des 9.
					Jahrhunderts" in Kommunikation durch Zeichen und Wort, Stätten und
					Formen der Kommunikation im Altertum IV, G. Binder, K. Ehlich
					hrsg., Wissenschaftlicher Verlag, Trier 1995, 137- 92.</li>

				<li>G. Endress, The Works of Yaḥyā ibn ‘Adī. An Analytical
					inventory, Reichert Verlag, Wiesbaden 1977.</li>

				<li>"Die wissenschaftliche Literatur", in Grundriss der
					Arabischen Philologie, hrsg. von H. Gätje, Band II (Literatur),
					Reichert Verlag, Wiesbaden 1987.</li>

				<li>"The Circle of al-Kindī. Early Arabic Translations from the
					Greek and the Rise of Islamic Philosophy", in The Ancient Tradition
					in Christian and Islamic Hellenism, in The Ancient Tradition in
					Christian and Islamic Hellenism. Studies on the Transmission of
					Greek Philosophy and Sciences dedicated to H.J. Drossaart Lulofs on
					his ninetieth birthday, ed. by G. Endress and R. Kruk, Leiden 1997,
					43-76.</li>

				<li>J. Freudenthal, Die durch Averroes erhaltenen Fragmente
					Alexanders zur Metaphysik des Aristoteles, Verlag der Königlichen
					Akademie der Wissenschaften, Berlin 1885.</li>

				<li>M. Geoffroy, "Remarques sur la traduction Usṭāṯ du livre
					Lambda de la Métaphysique, chapitre 6", Recherches de Théologie et
					Philosophie Médiévales 70 (2003), 417-36.</li>

				<li>J. Janssens, "Avicenne et sa 'paraphrase-commentaire' du
					livre Lambda (Kitab al-insaf)", Recherches de Théologie et
					Philosophie Médiévales 70 (2003), 401-16.</li>

				<li>I. Madkour, "La Métaphysique en terre d’Islam", Mélanges de
					l'Institut Dominicain d'Etudes Orientales 7 (1962-63), 21-34.</li>

				<li>A. Martin, "La Métaphysique. Tradition syriaque et arabe",
					in Dictionnaire des Philosophes Antiques éd. par R. Goulet, Ed. du
					CNRS, I, Paris 1989, 528-34.</li>

				<li>C. Martini Bonadeo, "La Métaphysique. Tradition syriaque et
					arabe (t. I, 1989, pp. 528-531). Mise à jour bibliographique", in
					Dictionnaire des Philosophes Antiques éd. par R. Goulet, Ed. du
					CNRS, Supplément, Paris 2003, 259-64.</li>

				<li>"La tradizione araba dei primi due libri della Metafisica
					di Aristotele: Libri a -A", in Aristotele e Alessandro di Afrodisia
					nella tradizione araba, a cura di C. D’Ancona e G. Serra, Il
					Poligrafo, Padova 2002, 75-112.</li>

				<li>"Un commento ad Alpha Elatton sicut litterae sonant nella
					Baġdād del X sec.", Medioevo 28 (2003), 69-96.</li>

				<li>"ΩΣ ΕΡΩΜΕΝΟΝ: alcune interpretazioni di Metaph. Λ 7", in
					Aristotele e i suoi esegeti neoplatonici. Logica ed ontologia nelle
					interpretazioni greche e arabe. Atti del convegno internazionale
					Roma, 19-20 ottobre 2001, a cura di V. Celluprica e C. D’Ancona,
					Bibliopolis, Roma 2004, 209-43.</li>

				<li>"The Arabic Aristotle in the 10th Century Bagdad. The Case
					of Yahya ibn ‘Adi’s Commentary on Metaph. Alpha Elatton", Veritas,
					52.3 (2007), 7-20.</li>

				<li>"The Arabic version of book Alpha Meizon of Aristotle’s
					Metaphysics and the testimony of MS. Bibl. Apostolica Vaticana,
					Ott. Lat. 2048", in Les traducteurs au travail. Leurs manuscrits et
					leurs méthodes. Actes du Colloque international organisé par le
					“Ettore Majorana Centre for Scientific Culture” (Erice, 30
					septembre - 6 octobre 1999), édités par J. Hamesse, Brepols,
					Turnhout 2001, 173-206.</li>

				<li>J. N. Mattock, "The Early translations from Greek into
					Arabic: an Experiment in Comparative Assessment", in Symposium
					Graeco-Arabicum: Akten des Zweiten Symposium Graeco-Arabicum,
					Ruhr-Universität Bochum, 3-5 März 1987, Hrsg. von G. Endress unter
					Mittwirkung von Marita Schmeink. Archivum Graeco-Arabicum, 1.,
					Amsterdam 1989, 73-102.</li>

				<li>A. Neuwirth, "Neue Materialen zur Arabischen Tradition der
					beiden ersten Metaphysik-Bücher", Die Welt des Islams 18,1-2
					(1977-78), 84-100.</li>

				<li>R. Ramón Guerrero, "Nota sobre la presencia del libro
					Lambda de la Metafísica de Aristóteles en el mundo árabe", La
					Ciudad de Dios, 198 (1985), 117-21.</li>

			</ul>
			<h:outputText style="margin-right: 10px;"
				value="A selected Bibliography on the ps-Theology is available on" />
			<h:outputLink id="link1" target="_new"
				value="http://www.greekintoarabic.eu/index.php">
				<f:param name="id" value="27" />
				<f:param name="reset" value="1" />
				<h:outputText value="Greek into Arabic Bibliography" />
			</h:outputLink>

		</p:tab>
		<p:tab title="Bibliotheca Arabica Scholasticorum Online">
			<p>
				A License Agreement between the Publisher Dar el-Mashreq and Greek
				into Arabic grants access to the volumes of the series "Bibliotheca
				Arabica Scholasticorum" (photos: Dr. Nicola Gronchi, Università di
				Pisa; web gallery: Centro Serra, Università di Pisa). Averroès,
				Tafsir ma ba‘d at-tabi‘at, Texte arabe inédit établi par Maurice
				Bouyges, Imprimerie Catholique, Beyrouth 1938-1952
				<h:outputLink id="biblio1" target="_new"
					value="http://www.greekintoarabic.eu/index.php">
					<f:param name="id" value="106" />
					<h:outputText
						value="Bibliotheca Arabica Scholasticorum, Série arabe V,1; V,2; VI; VII" />
				</h:outputLink>
			</p>
		</p:tab>
	</p:accordionPanel>

	<c:if test="#{!loginBean.loggedIn}">
		<h:form id="guestLogin">
			<p:panelGrid styleClass="tableNoBorder panelGridCenter">
				<p:row>
					<p:column style="text-align:center">
						<h:outputText style="font-weight:bold;font-size:1.2em"
							value="No account is needed to browse the G2A Web App website and use G2A Web App reading functions." />
					</p:column>
				</p:row>
				<p:row>
					<p:column style="text-align:center">
						<h:outputText style="font-style: italic;"
							value="ILC and Greek into Arabic provide free access (read only) to G2A Web Application." />
					</p:column>
				</p:row>
				<p:row>
					<p:column style="text-align:center">
						<p:commandButton id="freeAccessBtn" value="Free Access"
							action="#{loginBean.doLogin}">
							<f:setPropertyActionListener target="#{loginBean.username}"
								value="guest" />
							<f:setPropertyActionListener target="#{loginBean.password}"
								value="guest" />
						</p:commandButton>
					</p:column>
				</p:row>
			</p:panelGrid>
		</h:form>
		<h:form id="loginForm">
			<p:growl id="loginMessage" />
			<p:panelGrid styleClass="panelGridCenter">
				<f:facet name="header">
					<p:row>
						<p:column colspan="2">
					Enter your login information
				</p:column>
					</p:row>
				</f:facet>
				<p:row>
					<p:column>
						<h:outputLabel for="username" value="Username: *" />
					</p:column>
					<p:column>
						<p:inputText id="username" value="#{loginBean.username}"
							label="Firstname" required="true" />
					</p:column>
				</p:row>
				<p:row>
					<p:column>
						<h:outputLabel for="password" value="Password: *" />
					</p:column>
					<p:column>
						<p:password value="#{loginBean.password}" id="password"
							required="true" />
					</p:column>
				</p:row>
				<f:facet name="footer">
					<p:row>
						<p:column colspan="2" style="text-align:center">
							<p:commandButton id="login" value="Login" icon="ui-icon-check"
								type="submit" action="#{loginBean.doLogin}" ajax="false" />
						</p:column>
					</p:row>
				</f:facet>
			</p:panelGrid>
		</h:form>
	</c:if>
</ui:composition>